# Optimization of Vehicle Routing in Real-World Environments
The thesis focuses on optimization procedures in solving the VRP and their effectiveness in the context of data resembling real-world conditions. It is essential to emphasize the importance of verifying and comparing different VRP algorithms on the datasets resembling real-world scenarios. In this thesis, four extensions of the classic VRP problem are examined: the Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem (CVRP), which defines the maximum capacity (available space for transport from starting point) of each vehicle; the Vehicle Routing Problem with Simultaneous Delivery and Pickup (VRPSDP), which allows for simultaneous delivery and pickup along the entire route; the Vehicle Routing Problem with Backhauls (VRPB), which requires servicing all delivery points first, followed by the pickup points; and finally, the Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows (VRPTW), which specifies time windows within which each customer must be served. Through the analysis of different data categories, such as route variability, time and space constraints, and various technical parameters, the aim of the work is to determine which of the algorithms performs most effectively with the diverse challenges associated with vehicle routing in real environments. Each problem was modeled in accordance to the literature. The primary objective was not to test the time efficiencybut rather to demonstrate the relationship between the cost function, the repeatability of routes and edges for real-world examples and functionality of models with specific datasets. In the scientific literature on this topic, it is not common practice to analyze the distribution and various properties of points along vehicle routes. A comparison of changes in route structure depending on the cost metric used was also conducted, with the aim of demonstrating the significant impact this has on the obtained research results. Multiple datasets with varying characteristics, generated according to specified parameters, were utilized to emphasize the importance of the nature of input data and the type of parameters for each of the models. Additionally, programs were developed to ensure efficient data serialization, preparation, and presentation. Furthermore, efforts were made to adapt algorithms to meet the specific needs of the problems encountered. For basic use and visualisatin is recommended to execute TO_RUN_EXAMPLE.ipnyb, because without full CPLEX version and Collab PRO enviroment time execution would be to long to be executed.
